---
layout: single
title: "Introduction to Large Language Models & How They Understand Text"
date: 2025-12-03
categories: [LLM]
tags: [Fundamentals]
---

Large Language Models (LLMs) have existed for years, but they entered mainstream awareness in 2022 with the launch of ChatGPT.

Within days, millions of users adopted ChatGPT — making it one of the fastest-growing technologies in history. This moment significantly transformed the field of **Language Artificial Intelligence or LanguageAI**
It is a field characterized by the development of systems capable of understanding & generating human language.It can be used interchangebly with **Natural Language Processing (NLP)**.

---

## 🧠 Why Language is Hard for Machines

Human language is deeply rich, contextual, and ambiguous. We understand meaning through:

- Tone
- Culture
- Grammar
- Experience

Computers, however, process everything as sequences of 0s and 1s. Language which comes naturally to us humans is actually very tricky for computers to comprehend. 
Why? Because text is unstructured in nature and loses its meaning when represented as 0's and 1's. 
So throughout the history of LanguageAI, there has been a large focus on representing language in structured manner so that it can more easily be used by computers.

So a major challenge in Language AI has always been:

> How do we represent text in a way that machines can understand?

---

## 🧩 Solving the Representation Challenge

The evolution of NLP modeling has focused on converting raw text into structured, meaningful representations.

Language AI systems process the unstructured input text to produce one of the following:

- **Embeddings:** Convert words/sentences into numeric meaning
- **Text Generation:** Predict the next word to generate new text
- **Classification:** Identify categories, intent, or sentiment

Basic process for it is:

1. **Text Input** – unstructured sentences or documents.
2. **Language AI Processing** – the model tokenizes the text, converts it into numeric representations, and applies learned patterns.
3. **Different Types of Outputs**, such as:
   - **Text Generation** (creating new text)
   - **Embeddings** (numeric representations that capture meaning)
   - **Classification** (assigning labels, intent, or sentiment)


These numeric representations help models **capture semantic meaning** behind words — instead of treating them as plain symbols.

---

This post marks the beginning of my journey to document what I learn about LLMs — from concepts to practical applications.

Stay tuned as I go deeper into how these models work and how they are shaping intelligent systems.

